---
title: Git Version Control
tags: [Git, Cheat Sheet, Commands]
style: border
color: success
description: My git cheat sheet
---

## Introduction <!-- omit from toc --> 
Hello. This is my git cheat sheet for me to easily refer to. 

Over time I will append links to official documentation. If something does not look right, [please reach out](mailto:brian@waithaka.me).

---

{% capture list_items %}
Git clone
Git push
Git pull
Git branch
Git checkout
Git remote 
Git fetch
Git config
Git rebase
Git commit
Git reset
Git merge

Others
  
{% endcapture %}
{% include elements/list.html title="Table of Contents" type="toc" %}


#### Git clone
Used when beginning work on a new project and you need a local copy of the repo. Keep in mind this preserves previous commits made by others. 

```git
git clone https://<username>/<repository>.git
```
For a fresh start, download the files as a zip and
```git
git init
```

#### Git push
Update remote branch or repository with local changes. Omit *local_branch* to make changes to all branches with upstream connection
```git
git push origin <local_branch>
```

If working on a new branch created locally, you must first set upstream

```git
git push –-set-upstream origin <new_or_old_branch>
```

Update new branch name in remote repository, And then set upstream connection 
```git
git push <remote> :<old_branch_name> <new_branch_name>
```

Remove a branch from the remote repository
```git
git push <remote> :<branch_name> 
```

#### Git pull
Performs a git fetch and git merge in a single operation. 
If there are merge conflicts, they must be resolved by passing various arguments. 

```git
git pull origin
```

Add --rebase flag to append changes as commit ontop of local HEAD
```git
git pull origin --rebase 
``` 


#### Git branch
List all the local branches 
```git
git branch
```
To list remote branches, include the -a flag
```git
git branch -a
```

Change the branch name with the -m flag. You should checkout the branch you want to rename

```git
git branch -m <new_branch_name>
```


Delete a branch by adding -d flag and ensure you are not checked into said branch
```git
git branch -d <branch>
```

Use -D flag to force delete. Ensure you are okay with losing unmerged changes
```git
git branch -D <branch>
```

#### Git checkout
Switches to an existing branch 
```git
git checkout <branch name>
```

Creates a new branch and switches to it 
```git
git checkout -b <branch name>
```

#### Git remote
Check url set for push and pull to remote repository

```git
git remote -v
```

Change remote repository url
```git
git remote set-url origin https://github.com/<username>/<repository>.git
```

Shows entire remote configuration including all references to branches
```git
git remote show origin
```



#### Git fetch
Prunes local references to branches that are no longer on the remote repository

```git
git fetch --prune or git fetch -p
```

#### Git config
Change global settings for git locally
```git
git config --global --edit
```

#### Git rebase
Begin rebase in interactive mode from the very first commit 
```git
git rebase -i --root 
```

Used to navigate when checking out a commit during rebase 
```git
git rebase --continue       #Proceed with changes to next commit
git rebase --skip           #Ignore current commit and continue to next
git rebase --abort          #Entirely stop rebase and revert to previous state
```

#### Git commit 
Commit staged changes with a message 
```git
git commit -m "Enter message here"
```

Make changes to previous commit during rebase, add --no-edit flag to skip interactive

```git
git commit --amend --author="User name <user@domain.com>" --no-edit
git commit --amend --date="Mon Jun 12 12:05:24 2023 +0200"
```
#### Git reset
If you messed up and need to hard revert to previous point in history, run
```git
git reflog                          #To get the head offset value
git reset --hard HEAD@{5} 
```

#### Git merge
When you have pushed changes to remote repository and need to update local branch with origin/main 's changes. 

```git
git checkout <branch>
git merge origin/main
```

#### Others
```git
git log --oneline
git reflog
git status          #Check if changes are staged and status of branches
```


